Add "Understanding null safety" doc. (#2532)
dart-lang/site-www: src/null-safety/understanding-null-safety/index.md

---
title: Understanding null safety
description: A deep dive into all of the changes related to null safety and how to use them.
---

Null safety is the largest change we've made to Dart since we replaced the
original unsound optional type system with [a sound static type system][strong]
in Dart 2.0. When Dart first launched, compile-time null safety was a rare
feature needing a long introduction. Today, Kotlin, Swift, Rust, and other
languages all have their own answers to what has become a very [familiar
problem][billion]. Here is an example:

[strong]: /guides/language/type-system
[billion]: https://www.infoq.com/presentations/Null-References-The-Billion-Dollar-Mistake-Tony-Hoare/

```dart
bool isEmpty(String string) => string.length == 0;

main() {
  isEmpty(null);
}
```

> If you run this Dart program today, it will throw a `NoSuchMethodError`

Author: Done.

exception on the call to `.length`. The `null` value is an instance of the

> `Null` class, and `Null` has no "length" getter. Runtime failures suck. This is

Author: Let's let her advocate for herself when she returns then. :)

especially true in a language like Dart that is designed to run on an end-user's
device. If a server application fails, you can often restart it before anyone
notices. But when a Flutter app crashes on a user's phone, they are not happy.

> When you're users aren't happy, you aren't happy.

Author: Done.

Developers like statically-typed languages like Dart because they enable the
type checker to find mistakes in code at compile time, usually right in the IDE.
The sooner you find a bug, the sooner you can fix it. When language designers
talk about "fixing null reference errors", they mean enriching the static type
checker so that the language can detect mistakes like the above attempt to call
`.length` on a value that might be `null`.

There is no one true solution to this problem. Rust and Kotlin both have their
own approach that makes sense in the context of those languages. This doc walks
through all the details of our answer for Dart, which we call "null safety". It
includes a set of changes to the static type system and also a constellation of
other changes and new language features to let you not only write null-safe code
but hopefully to *enjoy* doing so.

This document is long. If you want something shorter that covers just what you

> need to know to get up and running, start with the [overview][overview]. When

Author: Done.

> you are ready to for a deeper understanding and have the time, come back here so

Author: Done.

you can understand deeply *how* the language handles `null`, *why* we designed
it that way, and how to write idiomatic, modern, null-safe Dart. (Spoiler alert:
it ends up being surprisingly close to how you write Dart today.)

As we said before, there are several ways a language can tackle null reference

> errors, each of which have their pros and cons. We had a few principles that

Author: Even better: just "These".

guided the choices we made:

*   **Code should be safe by default.** If you write new Dart code and don't use
    any explicitly unsafe features, it will never throw a null reference error
    at runtime. All possible null reference errors are caught statically. If you
    want to defer some of that checking to runtime to get greater flexibility,

>     you can, but you have to choose that by using some feature that is textually

Author: That's what I had in mind, yeah.

>     you can, but you have to choose that by using some feature that is textually

Reviewer: There's a minor quibble that could be made here about whether dynamic invocations count as textually visible.

    visible in the code.

    In other words, we aren't giving you a life jacket and leaving it up to you
    to remember to put it on every time you go out on the water. Instead, we
    give you a boat that doesn't sink. Unless you jump overboard, you'll stay
    dry.

*   **Null safe code should be easy to write.** Most existing Dart code is
    dynamically correct and does not throw null reference errors. You like your
    Dart program the way it looks now, and we want you to be able to keep
    writing code that way. Safety shouldn't require sacrificing usability,

>     paying penance to the type checker, or having to significantly change the

Author: I do my best. :)

    guarantees about semantic properties of a program, it means that the
    compiler can perform optimizations that assume those properties are true.
    When it comes to `null`, it means we can generate smaller code that
    eliminates unneeded `null` checks, and faster code that doesn't need to
    verify a receiver is non-`null` before calling methods on it.

    One caveat: We only guarantee soundness in Dart programs that are fully null
    safe. Dart supports programs that contain a mixture of newer null safe code
    and older legacy code from before Dart supported null safety. In these
    "mixed-mode" programs, null reference errors may still occur. During the
    process of migrating your code to null safety, you get all of the static
    safety benefits in the portions of your program that are migrated. But you
    don't get the full runtime soundness until you're fully null safe.

Note that *eliminating* `null` is not a goal. There's nothing wrong with `null`.
On the contrary, it's really useful to be able to represent the *absence* of a
value. Building support for a special "absent" value directly into the language

> lets us making working with absence flexible and usable. It underpins optional

Author: Fixed.

`Null` class. That's just `toString()`, `==`, and `hashCode`. So you can use
nullable types as map keys, store them in sets, compare them to other values,
and use them in string interpolation, but that's about it.

How do they interact with non-nullable types? It's always safe to pass a
*non*-nullable type to something expecting a nullable type. If a function
accepts `String?` then passing a `String` is allowed because it won't cause any
problems. We model this by making every nullable type a supertype of its
underlying type. You can also safely pass `null` to something expecting a nullable type, so
`Null` is also a subtype of every nullable type:

<img src="understanding-null-safety/nullable-hierarchy.png" width="50%">

But going the other direction and passing a nullable type to something expecting
the underlying non-nullable type is unsafe. Code that expects a `String` may
call `String` methods on the value. If you pass a `String?` to it, `null` could
flow in and that could fail:

```dart
requireStringNotNull(String definitelyString) {
  print(definitelyString.length);
}

main() {
  String? maybeString = null; // Or not!
  requireStringNotNull(maybeString);
}
```

> This program is not safe and we shouldn't allow it. However, Dart has this thing

Author: I don't want to change the tense of a bunch of paragraphs. Instead, changed this to "However, Dart has always had
this thing...". I think that hints that the behavior will change without having to put it all in the past tense.

exception at runtime, but at compile time, Dart says this is OK. Since
non-nullable types are modeled as subtypes of nullable types, implicit downcasts
would let you pass a `String?` to something expecting a `String`. Allowing that
would violate our goal of being safe by default. So with null safety we are
removing implicit downcasts entirely.

This makes the call to `requireStringNotNull()` produce a compile error, which
is what you want. But it also means *all* implicit downcasts become compile
errors, including the call to `requireStringNotObject()`. You'll have to add the
explicit downcast yourself:

```dart
requireStringNotObject(String definitelyString) {
  print(definitelyString.length);
}

main() {
  Object maybeString = "it is";
  requireStringNotObject(maybeString as String);
}
```

We think this is an overall good change. Our impression is that most users never
liked implicit downcasts. In particular, you may have been burned by this
before:

```dart
List<int> filterEvens(List<int> ints) {
  return ints.where((n) => n.isEven);
}
```

Spot the bug? The `.where()` method is lazy, so it returns an `Iterable`, not a

> `List`. This program will compile but then throw an exception at runtime when it

Author: Done.

tries to cast that `Iterable` to the `List` type that `filterEvens` declares it
returns. With the removal of implicit downcasts, this becomes a compile error.

Where were we? Right, OK, so it's as if we've taken the universe of types in
your program and split them into two halves:

<img src="understanding-null-safety/bifurcate.png">

There is a region of non-nullable types. Those types let you access all of the
interesting methods, but can never ever contain `null`. And then there is a
parallel family of all of the corresponding nullable types. Those permit `null`,
but you can't do much with them. We let values flow from the non-nullable side
to the nullable side because doing so is safe, but not the other direction.

That seems like nullable types are basically useless. They have no methods and
you can't get away from them. Don't worry, we have a whole suite of features to

> learn to help you move values from the nullable half over to the other side

Author: Yeah, good idea.

that is the supertype (directly or indirectly), that type is called the *top
type*. Likewise, if there is a weird type at that bottom that is a subtype of
every type, you have a *bottom type*. (In this case, your directed graph is a
[lattice][].)

[lattice]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lattice_(order)

It's convenient if your type system has a top and bottom type, because it means
that type-level operations like least upper bound (which type inference uses to
figure out the type of a conditional expression based on the types of its two
branches) can always produce a type. Before null safety, `Object` was Dart's top
type and `Null` was its bottom type.

Since `Object` is non-nullable now, it is no longer a top type. `Null` is not a
subtype of it. Dart has no *named* top type. If you need a top type, you want
`Object?`. Likewise, `Null` is no longer the bottom type. If it was, everything
would still be nullable. Instead, we've added a new bottom type named `Never`:

<img src="understanding-null-safety/top-and-bottom.png" width="50%">

In practice, this means:

*   If you want to indicate that you allow a value of any type, use `Object?`

>     instead of `Object`. In fact, it becomes pretty rare to use `Object` since

Reviewer 2: Do we have data on the relative usage of `Object?` and `Object` ? I'm suspicious that `Object` is less rare than indicated here.

Author: No official data. This is based on my experience migrating the core libraries and tests. Most places that were previously using `Object` ended up getting changed to `Object?`. The only exceptions I can think of offhand are code dealing with errors/exceptions because the language specifically prohibits throwing `null`, and overrides of `==` because, again, the language prohibits `null`.

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't consider the core libraries and tests to be particularly representative of the ecosystem.

I'm worried about sending an unintentionally prescriptive message with this.

    that type means "could be any possible value except this one weirdly

>     prohibted value `null`".

Reviewer 3: Oops, missed that one!

>     prohibted value `null`".

Author: Done.

> *   On the rare times you need a bottom type, use `Never` instead of `Null`.

Reviewer 3: agree, "On the rare occasion" is good.

> *   On the rare times you need a bottom type, use `Never` instead of `Null`.

Author: Good call.

>     If you don't know if you need it, you probably don't.

Reviewer 2: Which is the "it" here? `Never` or `Null`?

Author: Bottom type. Clarified.

> ## Ensuring Correctness

Author: Done. (Fixed all the other headers too.)

> We bifurcated the universe of types into nullable and non-nullable halves. In

Reviewer 4: [nit] I like the word "bifurcate" as much as anyone, but I wonder if it's gratuitous language here. Unless _bifurcate_ is a term Dart developers should know, or an important term they might _want_ to know, I'd go with something simpler.

```suggestion
We split the universe of types into nullable and non-nullable halves. In
```

Author: Aww. Fine. How about "divided"?

order to maintain soundness and our principle that you can never get a null
reference error at runtime unless you ask for it, we need to guarantee that
`null` never appears in any type on the non-nullable side.

Getting rid of implicit downcasts and removing `Null` as a bottom type covers
all of the main places that types flow through a program across assigments and
from arguments into parameters on function calls. The main remaining places
where `null` can sneak in are when a variable first comes into being and when
you leave a function. So there are some additional compile errors:

### Invalid returns

If a function has a non-nullable return type, then every path through the

> function must reach a `return` statement that returns a value. Dart before null

Author: Done.

safety, Dart was pretty lax about missing returns. For example:

```dart
String missingReturn() {
  // No return.
}
```

If you analyze this, you get a gentle *hint* that *maybe* you forgot a return,
but if not, no big deal. That's because if execution reaches the end of a
function body then Dart implicitly returns `null`. Since every type is nullable,
*technically* this function is safe, even though it's probably not what you

> want.

Reviewer 4: I wonder if it makes sense to use past tense in paragraphs like this. People scan documents, or they just don't get the meaning of a sentence above, and they might get the impression that the behavior explained here is the current one. It might help to put all the "before null safety" in past tense, and all the "after" as present tense.

This will also make the document more long-lived as-is. I think we expect most readers to read this when null safety is either almost here, or completely here.

Author: Yeah, tense and temporality is hard. I'm trying to balance both where the language is at the point in time that a reader reads this, and where they are as they make progress through the document. Also, large passages in convoluted tenses can be painful to read. ("Large passages that had been being in convoluted tenses will have been painful to have been reading.")

You're right this paragraph reads better as past tense. Done. Tweaked some other places too.

With sound non-nullable types, this program is flat out wrong and unsafe. Under
null safety, you get a compile error if a function with a non-nullable return
type doesn't reliably return a value. By "reliably", I mean that the language
analyzes all of the control flow paths through the function. As long as they all
return something, it is satisfied. The analysis is pretty smart, so even this
function is OK:

```dart
String alwaysReturns(int n) {
  if (n == 0) {
    return 'zero';
  } else if (n < 0) {
    throw ArgumentError('Negative values not allowed.');
  } else {
    if (n > 1000) {
      return 'big';
    } else {
      return n.toString();
    }
  }
}
```

We'll dive more deeply into the new flow analysis in the next section.

### Uninitialized variables

When you declare a variable, if you don't give it an explicit initializer, Dart
default initializes the variable with `null`. That's convenient, but obviously
totally unsafe if the variable's type is non-nullable. So we have to tighten
things up for non-nullable variables:

*   **Top level variable and static field declarations must have an

>     initializer.** Since these are lazy and can be accessed and assigned from

Reviewer 4: [nit] If there's a place to link to from "lazy", I'd do it. Not everyone will know what you mean.

Author: Actually, laziness doesn't come into play anyway. Deleted.

    anywhere in the program, it's impossible for the compiler to guarantee that
    the variable will be assigned a value before it gets read. So the only safe
    option is to require the declaration itself to have an initializing
    expression that produces a value of the right type:

    ```dart
    int topLevel = 0;

    class SomeClass {
      static int staticField = 0;
    }
    ```

*   **Instance fields must either have an initializer at the declaration, use an
    initializing formal, or be initialized in the constructor's initialization
    list.** That's a lot of jargon. Here are the examples:

    ```dart
    class SomeClass {
      int atDeclaration = 0;
      int initializingFormal;
      int initializationList;

      SomeClass(this.initializingFormal)
          : initializationList = 0;
    }
    ```

>     In other words, as long as the field has a value by the time you reach the

Reviewer 2: [nit] I'm worried that "by the time you reach" might still get misinterpreted as allowing initialization in the constructor body. I think "before you reach" is slightly more clear.

Author: Good point. Done.

    constructor body, you're good.

> *   Local variables are the fun one. A non-nullable local variable *doesn't*

Reviewer 4: [nit] "are a fun one" reads to me like "the semantics are kind of crazy here". This is almost the opposite of what you're trying to say, I assume. 

```suggestion
*   With local variables, we can be a lot smarter. A non-nullable local variable *doesn't*
```

Author: Changed to "most flexible case".

    need to have an initializer. This is perfectly fine:

    ```dart
    int tracingFibonacci(int n) {
      int result;
      if (n < 2) {
        result = n;
      } else {
        result = tracingFibonacci(n - 2) + tracingFibonacci(n - 1);
      }

      print(result);
      return result;
    }
    ```

    The rule is only that **a local variable must be *definitely assigned*
    before it is used.** We get to rely on the new flow analysis I alluded to
    for this as well. As long as every path to a variable's use initializes it
    first, the use is OK.

*   **Optional parameters must have a default value.** If you don't pass an
    argument for an optional positional or named parameter, then the language
    fills it in with the default value. If you don't specify a default value,
    the default default value is `null`, and that doesn't fly if the parameter's
    type is non-nullable.

    So, if you want a parameter to be optional, you need to either make it
    nullable or specify a valid non-`null` default value.

> These restrictions sound onerous, but in they aren't too bad in practice. They

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
These restrictions sound onerous, but they aren't too bad in practice. They
```

Author: Done.

are very similar to the existing restrictions around `final` variables and
you've likely been working with those for years without even really noticing.
Also, remember that these only apply to *non-nullable* variables. You can always
make the type nullable and then get the default initialization to `null`.

Even so, the rules do cause friction. Fortunately, we have a suite of new
language features to lubricate the most common patterns where these new
limitations slow you down. First, though, it's time to talk about flow analysis.

## Flow Analysis

[Control flow analysis][] has been around in compilers for years. It's mostly
hidden from users and used during compiler optimization, but some newer
languages have started to use the same techniques for visible language features.
Dart already has a dash of flow analysis in the form of *type promotion*:

```dart
bool isEmptyList(Object object) {
  if (object is List) {
    return object.isEmpty;
  } else {
    return false;
  }
}
```

[control flow analysis]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Control_flow_analysis

> Note how on the marked line, we can call `isEmpty` on `object`. That method is

Author: Oops, marked!

defined on `List`, not `Object`. This works because the type checker looks at
all of the `is` expressions and the control flow paths in the program. If the
body of some control flow construct only executes when a certain `is` expression
on a variable is true, then inside that body the variable's type is "promoted"
to the tested type.

> In the example here, the then block of the `if` statement only runs when

Author: It was correct but awkward. Changed to "the then branch". Is that better?

`object` actually contains a list. Therefore, Dart promotes `object` to type
`List` instead of its declared type `Object`. This is a handy feature, but it's

> pretty limited. The following functionally identical program does not work:

Author: Done.

> ```dart

Author: Added a marker on the erroneous line.

that expression can never successfully finish evaluating. It must throw an
exception, abort, or otherwise ensure that the surrounding code expecting the
result of the expression never runs.

In fact, according to the language, the static type of a `throw` expression is
`Never`. The type `Never` is declared in the core libraries and you can use it
as a type annotation. Maybe you have a helper function to make it easier to
throw a certain kind of exception:

```dart
Never wrongType(String type, Object value) {
  throw ArgumentError('Expected $type, but was ${value.runtimeType}.');
}
```

You might use it like so:

```dart
class Point {
  final double x, y;

  bool operator ==(Object other) {
    if (other is! Point) wrongType("Point", other);
    return x == other.x && y == other.y;
  }

  // Constructor and hashCode...
}
```

This program analyzes without error. Notice that the last line of the `==`
method accesses `.x` and `.y` on `other`. It has been promoted to `Point` even
though the function doesn't have any `return` or `throw`. The control flow
analysis knows that the declared type of `wrongType()` is `Never` which means

> the then body of the `if` statement *must* abort somehow. Since the second

Reviewer 3: OOOOOHH, now i get it. Yes, please code font.  :)

> the then body of the `if` statement *must* abort somehow. Since the second

Author: Changed to "then branch" like the other places use. Putting it in code font seems weird to me since "then" isn't a keyword in Dart. I could hyphenate like "then-branch" if you think that helps. A couple of textbooks I have do that to refer to programming language constructs.

checking for `null` before calling methods. The new flow analysis on null checks
turns that *dynamic* correctness into provable *static* correctness.

It also, of course, works with the smarter analysis we do for reachability. The
above function can be written just as well as:

```dart
String makeCommand(String executable, [List<String>? arguments]) {
  var result = executable;
  if (arguments == null) return result;
  return result + ' ' + arguments.join(' ');
}
```

The language is also smarter about what kinds of expressions cause promotion. An
explicit `== null` or `!= null` of course works. But explicit casts using `as`,
or assignments, or the postfix `!` operator we'll get to soon also cause
promotion. The general goal is that if the code is dynamically correct and it's
reasonable to figure that out statically, the analysis should be clever enough
to do so.

### Unnecessary code warnings

Having smarter reachability analysis and knowing where `null` can flow through
your program helps ensure that you *add* code to handle `null`. But we can also
use that same analysis to detect code that you *don't* need. Before null safety,

> if you write something like:

Author: Done.

with one. Fortunately, collection-like classes rarely call methods on their
elements.

In places where you don't have access to a value, you can make the type
parameter nullable:

```dart
class Box<T> {
  final T? object;
  Box.empty();
  Box.full(this.object);
}
```

Note the `?` on the declaration of `object`. Now the field has an explicitly
nullable type, so it is fine to leave it uninitialized.

When you make a type parameter type nullable like `T?` here, you may need to
cast the nullability away. The correct way to do that is using an explicit `as
T` cast, *not* the `!` operator:

```dart
class Box<T> {
  final T? object;
  Box.empty();
  Box.full(this.object);

  T unbox() => object as T;
}
```

The `!` operator *always* throws if the value is `null`. But if the type
parameter has been instantiated with a nullable type, then `null` is a perfectly
valid value for `T`:

```dart
main() {
  var box = Box<int?>.full(null);
  print(box.unbox());
}
```

This program should run without error. Using `as T` accomplishes that. Using
`!` would throw an exception.

Other generic types have some bound that restricts the kinds of type arguments
that can be applied:

```dart

> Rect<T extends num> {

Reviewer: `class Rect`?

Author: You mean we aren't making `class` optional? :) Done.

  final T left, top, right, bottom;

  Rect(this.left, this.top, this.right, this.bottom);

>   T get area => (right - left) * (bottom - top);

Reviewer: Will this actually work with out a downcast with Lasse's current proposal?

Author: Hmm, not sure. Replaced this class entirely with a simpler example. PTAL.

}
```

If the bound is non-nullable, then the type parameter is also non-nullable. This
means you have the restrictions of non-nullable types&mdash;you can't leave
fields and variables uninitialized. But you can call any methods on values of
the type parameter type that are declared on its bound. Having a non-nullable
bound does, however, prevent *users* of your generic class from instantiating it
with a nullable type argument. That's probably a reasonable limitation for most
classes.

You can also use a nullable *bound*:

```dart

> Rect<T extends num?> {

Reviewer: `class Rect`?

  final T left, top, right, bottom;

  T get area => (right - left) * (bottom - top);
}
```

> This means that in the body of the class you get the flexibility of treating the

Reviewer: It's a little confusing here whether you intend the code to be invalid or not.  As written, the definition of `area` is invalid, so maybe call that out in some way?

Author: Oops, I just totally forgot to update the code. Replaced it with a better example.

in practice most code creates lists using list literals, `List.filled()`,
`List.generate()`, or as a result of transforming some other collection. For
the edge case where you want to create an empty list of some type, we added a
new `List.empty()` constructor.

The pattern of creating a completely uninitialized list has always felt out of
place in Dart, and now it is even more so. If you have code broken by this,
you can always fix it by using one of the many other ways to produce a list.

### Cannot set a larger length on non-nullable lists

This is little known, but the `length` getter on `List` also has a corresponding
*setter*. You can set the length to a shorter value to truncate the list. And
you can also set it to a *longer* length to pad the list with uninitialized
elements.

If you were to do that with a list of a non-nullable type, you'd violate
soundness when you later accessed those unwritten elements. To prevent that, the
`length` setter will throw a runtime exception if (and only if) the list has a
non-nullable element type *and* you set it to a *longer* length. It is still
fine to truncate lists of all types, and you can grow lists of nullable types.

> There is an important consequence of this if you define your own list types that

Reviewer: This feels a little oddly stated.  The core issue is that you have to implement `add` yourself, because the version in ListMixin has to use the length setter.  I think `insert` actually may be fixed to not use `add` now?  cc @natebosch was this fixed?

Reviewer 2: No, we have to use `add` for null safe code. Part of the migration does need to be to implement `add` if you are using `ListMixin`.

Author: Reworded it some.
